[Music]
welcome to topcast episode
30. this is part three of chapter 12
of physicist history of bad philosophy
with some remarks on bad science
and today we're going to be spending a
little bit more time on the bad science
aspect of the chapter
now when it comes to bad science as we
indicated at the end of the last
section at the end of the last part that
i did part two
really what we're talking about is
explanationless science
there's studies that you can do
investigations experiments if you like
that can purport to show correlations
between variables
now an investigation that purports to
find a relationship
a correlation between two variables it
might be interesting
but unless we have a causal mechanism
whereby one variable causes another
variable to increase
whereby an increase in one variable
causes the increase in another variable
we have an explanation as to what that
cause is
we have explanationless science now
there are many
examples of explanation of science
david's going to use behaviorism as
an example really of explanationless
science but there are other kinds
for example in the area of public health
i can't remember precisely when the
study was i'm
sure i could look it up now but back in
the 80s approximately
there was a study purporting to show
that the closer someone lived to a power
stanchion
the worse their health outcomes were and
so
this is explanation assigned until we
have an explanation why
proximity to a power astonishing causes
poor
health outcomes we don't have a
scientific theory all we have is a
correlation
there could be a third factor now in
this case it is true i think in certain
areas of america
the closer you live to a power stanchion
the more likely you are
to have a lower life expectancy and so
many people at the time
interpreted this as meaning there are
electromagnetic waves coming out of
those power staunches
affecting people's dna causing cancer
causing other sorts of health problems
and so this was the reason why one
wouldn't want to live near a power
stauncher
now physicists kind of knew that the
electromagnetic radiation
coming from a high voltage power
staunchen
is usually very low frequency indeed you
might get some radio waves
but we have an explanation as to why
that can't cause ionization of atoms in
the dna
and therefore cause mutations and
therefore cause cancers so we had an
explanation of that
a good explanation in other words as to
why the power staunch in itself was not
causing the worse health outcomes
the better explanation as it turns out
is that
people who live close to power staunches
live in houses where the land value is
lower
people don't want to live near power
staunches real estate agents have
difficulty selling houses
around power staunches because you've
got this big ugly
tower in your backyard ruining the view
taking up space whatever it causes the
value of the land to go down possibly
for irrational reasons
but if that's the case people who live
in those areas can't afford
better healthcare and because they can't
afford better healthcare that means that
their
health outcomes are generally going to
be worse had nothing to do with radio
waves or other kinds of energy
coming from the electrical wires so this
is a case where
we can have a very good correlation
between two things
and yet one does not cause the other
there's a third factor
and that third factor actually means
that you can't extrapolate you can't use
that relationship to
make useful predictions without an
explanation there's no possibility of
making predictions
a prediction would mean that you'd be
able to take a particular person
living in close proximity to a power
stauntion
and be able to determine that that
person is more likely to have worse
health outcomes
however we could falsify this in many
different ways there would be
people who do not fit the trend once you
have people that don't fit the trend
another word for that is
a falsification of the theory that
power staunches cause bad health
outcomes for people
now similar kinds of bad science happen
everywhere
not so much in the physical sciences and
we'll get to the reasons why
and it's got to do with uncertainty
analysis or
being able to quantify your errors or at
least being able to
say what the likely sources of error are
going to be in your study
but in other areas of science
let's say environmental science there
could be all sorts of ways in which we
could find a correlation between
say increasing average global
temperatures
and all sorts of supposedly bad
environmental effects
species decline increasing wildfires or
bushfires
increase in hurricanes or tornadoes
increasing
desertification decrease in corals etc
etc etc
now there may be mechanisms for some of
these things
but i'm not too sure whether or not the
mechanism for all of these things must
come down to an
increase in the amount of carbon dioxide
in the atmosphere at any given time
it could be that these things are caused
by something else
it could still be due to climate change
but perhaps by some mechanism other than
the increase in carbon dioxide emissions
let's say
so david has come to the point in this
chapter where he's talking about
the fact that in behavioral studies of
people's psychology
typically what is done is that surveys
are conducted or people's behavior is
monitored
and that behavior might include things
like marking check boxes on a survey
and these survey responses might be used
to determine whether or not someone is
suffering from depression
or whether or not someone is
functionally very happy or not and then
some kind of genetic study might be
performed
and we might find a correlation between
genes or genetic similarities between
people
and their tendency to report themselves
as having high levels of happiness
let's say but of course marking check
boxes on a
survey isn't really measuring happiness
it's not an objective measure of
happiness
it's a subjective measure on the part of
the
person on the part of the subject of
their own
internal conscious states and as we
mentioned in the last episode
different people might have different
standards for feeling precisely the same
way
so two people even though they're both
saying that they
feel a happiness level of six out of ten
they both might actually feel in reality
quite different
and on the other hand of course two
people who feel exactly the same
subjectively speaking we've got no
access to someone's subjectivity at the
moment except via this proxy this proxy
of
marking a survey making marks on a
survey
to people that feel actually in reality
ontologically the same
might in fact mark might in fact
report different levels of happiness one
might say they're only a three out of
ten
because they expect that life could be a
lot better than what it is but on the
other hand someone might
mark for exactly the same sensations
that they've got
uh in terms of their physiology they
might mark themselves
seven out of ten simply because they've
got different standards
and why might people have different
standards well some people could just be
neutral pessimists and some people could
be all optimus
and that could be because of what they
know about reality
as well now david's about to get to the
point where he's talking about the fact
that there
can be scientific studies quite rigorous
scientific studies where
the marking of check boxes is perfectly
valid
it's not valid in that case where we're
just talking about people reporting on
their own
internal subjective states unless we can
have a ruler
or a thermometer or some sort of
objective test
as to what's going on inside of that
person's subjective mental experience
we don't have access to that person's
internal subjective experience all we
have access to
is their reporting on their
internal subjective experience this is
not
typical science we wouldn't go to a
physicist and say
how did the temperature of the water
feel to you just describe it no we don't
want them to say it felt really hot to
me or it felt cold to me or it felt
approximately 25 degrees celsius to me
we want a thermometer reading we want an
instrument to be able to have access
to that water and not merely to have the
physicist or chemist or whoever it is
reporting on how they felt at the time
that would be rejected in any other area
of science but of course in psychology
this is de rigueur this is typical this
is what people do
and i guess to some extent they're doing
their best they don't have anything else
and and they're doing something but we
can't say they're doing good
science so let me read from the
beginning of infinity
and i'm up to page 317 for anyone who's
following along
and david writes there are circumstances
under which there is a good explanation
linking the measurable proxy such as
marking checkboxes with a quantity of
interest
and in such cases there need be nothing
unscientific about the study
for example political opinion surveys
may ask whether respondents are happy
with a given politician facing
re-election under the theory that this
gives information about which checkbox
the respondents will choose in the
election itself
that theory is then tested at the
election pause there
my reflection um so this is the whole
idea of
pre-polling or polls in general maybe
not exit polls because david's there
talking about
um uh beforehand before the election
about testing things before they are
supposed to be done after the election
as well
and notoriously these days the
our understanding of polling has really
been pushed around the validity of
polling
one reason is of course that people are
it would seem possibly embarrassed to
tell
pollsters how they really feel about
certain candidates
in some cases they might actively be
lying to the pollsters
for a whole bunch of reasons which would
make polling
quite unscientific so in fact here
this this idea actually presumes that
people are
honestly reporting on the survey about
the politician
if you ask whether you would vote for
john smith if a a random pollster
say stops you in the street or calls you
on the phone and says
how do you feel about john smith and you
say very good
will you be voting for john smith and
you'll say absolutely
might very well be the case that you're
just saying that
in an attempt to appear to have an
acceptable opinion
to the pollster this appears to be a
factor these days it's a new phenomenon
so far as i know
people being embarrassed or concerned
about
how they might be viewed by the pollster
and this is
this goes some way to explaining why
polls are no longer completely reliable
and so we've seen that for the last few
elections anyway last few major
elections in the western world anyway
people being concerned about how they
appear to
a random person who's asking them how
they feel about particular politicians
now putting that aside okay so putting
that little quibble aside it otherwise
might be the case that
certain surveys can be perfectly
scientifically valid
but as david says there is no analog of
such a test in the case of happiness
there is no independent way of measuring
it
another example of bonafide science
would be a clinical trial to test a drug
purported to alleviate
particular identifiable types of
unhappiness
in that case the objective of the study
is again to determine whether the drug
causes behaviour
such as saying that one is happier
without also experiencing adverse side
effects
if a drug passes that test the issue of
whether or not it
really makes the patients happier or
merely alters the personality to have
lower standards or something of that
sort
is inaccessible to science until such
time as there is a testable explanatory
theory of what happened happiness is
paused my reflection so this is an
interesting point that david's making
there
about let's say antidepressants so
do antidepressants actually cause the
person who's taking them to in reality
experience greater levels of happiness
or is it the case
that it makes the unhappiest unhappiness
that they tend to feel
more tolerable and so it's very
difficult for the person to probably be
able to distinguish between these two
different cases
perhaps impossible certainly for the
person doing the study
it will be difficult to determine
whether or not they've lowered their
standards or not
and so filling out a survey or reporting
to the doctor that they
feel better that they feel like their
depression has been alleviated could be
a consequence of them
actually feeling more happy in reality
or
it could be the fact that they don't
feel in truth happier in reality it's
just that their standards have been
lowered
now are these two things the same in
reality no no
because there is ontologically
some reality of a state of happiness
now we don't know what that is
scientifically but
it must be the case that there are in
objective ontological reality what's
going on inside of your
mind can either be very very happy or
extremely unhappy and anything in
between and
how you then feel about that state let's
say that you are
objectively on happiness level state
nine
ontologically speaking sam harris likes
to speak about this so there is a
reality to your subjectivity
and sam harris gets this from john surl
i think and so this is where it
really comes into its own this
distinction this way of speaking about
subjectivity and objectivity now
your consciousness has real
existence it really exists unless you're
daniel dennett of course and you argue
that you have no such
consciousness nonetheless i think
there's consciousness
i think most philosophers believe that
there is consciousness know that there
is a kind of consciousness
we don't know how to replicate
consciousness we don't have agi yet
nonetheless consciousness exists and if
consciousness exists
and if conscious states therefore exist
then there is a
way of determining that
some are objectively better than others
this conscious state of
suffering is objectively worse in this
conscious state of feeling joy
let's say and there might be different
levels of joy or different levels of
happiness
now given that's the case if you are
objectively on happiness level
4 out of 10 that's objectively where you
are
then you will also have a theory about
how happiness level 4 exists
you might not know exactly what
happiness level 4 exists feels like
now this is where it gets a little bit
weird and complicated but if we had a
scientific
theory of subjective states of
consciousness
then in some far distant future we might
know what happiness level 4 for a
human being feels like now when you are
asked by the doctor how do you feel
on a scale of one to ten even though you
actually
in reality occupy happiness level four
at that particular point
you might say oh i actually i feel like
a three out of ten now you'll be wrong
about that
but you've got some access to how you
feel now you're just making an error
you're making an error because you don't
have an objective way of measuring your
own
happiness and unhappiness on a scale of
one to ten now when you take an
antidepressant
it might it might be the case that it
elevates you from
what is in objective reality a four out
of ten what you have reported as being a
three out of ten it might actually
raise that to a seven out of ten and you
will report that having taken the
antidepressant
you might report that it has actually
alleviated your depressed
depression it has actually raised your
level of happiness
and you'd be right about that but you'd
be wrong about of course some having
claimed
that you were on happiness level three
to begin with actually we're a four
now there is another alternative of
course that in fact what the
antidepressant does is has no effect
whatsoever on the objective
state that you occupy you remain at
happiness level four
in reality in objective reality you're
still on a four
but it causes you to think to change
your opinions about
what happiness level four feels like and
so you will then report a7
so it causes you actually to increase
your errors now
you go and fill out the survey of seven
out of ten and in both cases the first
case where
in reality you've been raised to a seven
but the other possibility is of course
that your happiness level has not been
raised your depression
has not been alleviated but behaviorism
you know effectively
the antidepressant has worked because
you're no longer
saying you're depressed even though
nothing much about your
brain chemistry so to speak has been
changed although
okay i know in reality ssris
serotonin-specific reuptake inhibitors i
know that they actually do all to brain
chemistry
okay all that aside let's go back to the
book
david writes in explanationless science
one may acknowledge that actual
happiness
and the proxy one is measuring are not
necessarily equal
but one nevertheless calls the proxy
happiness and moves on
one chooses a large number of people
ostensibly at random though in real life
one is restricted to small minorities
such as university students in a
particular country seeking additional
income
and one excludes those who have
detectable extrinsic reasons
for happiness or unhappiness such as
recent lottery wins or bereavement
so one subjects are just typical people
though in fact one cannot tell whether
they are statistically representative
without an explanatory theory next one
defines the heritability of a trait
as its degree of statistical correlation
with how genetically related the people
are
again that is a non-explanatory
definition according to it
whether one was a slave or not was once
a highly heritable trait in america
it ran in families now i'm just going to
read
that short paragraph again
because we're going to come back to it
and i think it's something that people
tend to miss in this chapter so
i'll say it again one defines the
heritability
of a trait as its degree of statistical
correlation
with how genetically related the people
are
again that is a non-explanatory
definition
according to it whether one was a slave
or not
was once a highly heritable trait in
america
it ran in families more generally one
acknowledges that statistical
correlations
do not imply anything about what causes
what but one
adds the inductivist equivocation that
they can be suggestive though
so just pause there i'm just wanting to
emphasize here what david's doing here
is he is kind of setting up how it is
that you go about performing
a scientific study that is a scientific
study
in form only it's not scientific in the
sense that you're producing good
hard to vary explanations in science
this is the way you do
you go through and you just go through
the formal process of appearing to do
science or appearing to do an experiment
or finding a correlation let's say
but at no point are you going to suggest
that
this thing causes that thing or that or
or if you do you're going to equivocate
about it
david continues then one does the study
and finds that happiness is say
50 heritable this asserts nothing about
happiness itself
until the relevant explanatory theories
are discovered at some time in the
future perhaps
after consciousness is understood and
agis are commonplace technology
yet people find the result interesting
because they interpret it via
everyday meanings of the words happiness
inheritable
under that interpretation which the
authors of the study if they are
scrupulous
will nowhere have endorsed the result is
a profound contribution to a wide class
of philosophical and scientific debates
about the nature of the human mind
pressure reports of the discovery will
reflect this the headline will say
new study shows happiness 50 genetically
determined
without quotation marks around the
technical terms pause there my
reflection
um all you need to do is to go to google
and look up or do a google search on
happiness genetically determined
or something like that and you will
indeed find studies
precisely of the kind that david has
talked about there
david continues suppose that someone now
does dare to seek explanatory theories
about the cause of human happiness
happiness is a state of continually
solving one's problems
they conjecture unhappiness is caused by
being chronically borked in one's
attempts to do that
and solving problems itself depends on
knowing how
so external factors aside unhappiness is
caused by
not knowing how readers may recognize
this as a special case of the principle
of optimism
paul said my reflection so as david is
sort of hinting at here
we might very well interpret uh
unhappiness
as being about not knowing how to solve
the problem
of not being happy you know not being
happy is a problem if you could solve
that then that would be the solution to
unhappiness
that's how to be more happy to
continually solve your problems
usually of course the problem is not
just this generic thing of i just want
to be happier it's a particular thing
how to solve some particular problem
like if you're chronically in pain and
you don't want to be
if you could solve that then you would
be happier
if you have an illness that you there is
no cure for
you're unhappy until such time as you're
cured of it
you're on your way to work you're
already running late and you've got a
flat tire
until such time as you are able to fix
the flat tire then you're more unhappy
than you otherwise would have been
so this can be what unhappiness is now
of course
many people do say that there is this uh
very real state of being depressed when
everything appears to be going right in
one's life but nonetheless
you still feel unhappy what would be
the view of this kind of philosophy for
that kind of state
now it might very well be that it could
be a
chemical imbalance but it could also be
simply that you don't know what the
problems are that are causing you
unhappiness it could be
unconscious states it could of course be
poor chemistry in your brain in which
case it still comes down to the fact
that you don't know
how to be more happy and it might be
that you need to fix this chemical
imbalance in your brain
i wouldn't say that that would be the
solution to
every single form of what is called
depression
in psychological science it's more
likely to be the case
that there's going to be perhaps things
one is not fully aware of
things one is not fully thinking clearly
about
that is causing the unhappiness and if
those things could be identified
and this is where psychology really is
important
then the unhappiness could be cured
things like
cognitive behavioral therapy things like
any kind of talk therapy
speaking to a psychologist are certainly
going to help
people who are chronically unhappy or
depressed
it still comes down to not knowing how
to solve the problem of unhappiness
because it might be the case that one
does not know why
one is unhappy it's about knowledge it's
never
not about knowledge it's never about
simply denying the fact that there is a
solution involving an explanation as to
why one's
mental state is the way it is and is
the way that it is in a way that one
doesn't want it to be
okay so continuing the beginning of
infinity and david's talking about this
study that shows a correlation between
unhappiness or happiness
and certain kinds of genetic
predisposition towards the happiness or
not
david writes interpreters of the study
say that it has refuted that theory of
happiness
that theory of happiness being that
happiness is a state of continually
solving one's problems
at most they say fifty percent of
unhappiness can be caused by not knowing
how
the other fifty percent is beyond our
control genetically determined
and hence independent of what we know or
believe pending the relevant genetic
engineering using the same logic
on the slavery example one could have
concluded in 1860 that say
95 of slavery is genetically determined
and therefore beyond the power of
political action to remedy pause their
my reflection
this is a really powerful point many
people
and it is a huge area of popular science
right now
seem to think that if something has a
genetic component
then that means it must be genetically
determined
that if there is some gene for a thing
then there is no way in which
or if there is some gene implicated in a
particular
feature of humanity then there is no way
that that can be changed
except via genetic engineering but this
is a perfect refutation of that
it is the case it simply was the case
historically
that in the united states that
you could do a genetic study you could
use modern methods of assessing the dna
of people and find that there is indeed
a genetic component to being a slave
but this does not mean that it was
genetically determined
that it was necessarily the case because
necessarily means it was unavoidably the
case in much the same way that
um it's necessarily the case that that
that element number six on the periodic
table is carbon okay that is a
scientifically necessarily determined
thing
or that force equals mass times
acceleration a a
a necessarily scientifically determined
thing well this is not the case
with slavery slavery was the result
of a particular very poor
moral and political theory about human
beings
typically white people from london did
not find themselves slaves in the south
of the united states
there was a genetic component here but
this does not mean it was determined to
be the case
any number of scientific studies could
have concluded this and indeed
the problem of slavery of that kind
was indeed solved but it wasn't solved
by genetic engineering
it was solved by people knowing better
learning better creating the relevant
moral knowledge
about what people are and it had nothing
to do with changing people's genes
so that even though there was apparently
the genetic component to slavery
it had nothing to do with changing
people's genes to remove the slavery
so too then with unhappiness it might
very well be solved
you know the chronic unhappiness or
depression
might very well be solved no matter what
the genetic component is
if we can recognize what happiness
actually is
if it is actually about being able to
solve
one's problems once they're identified
of course we have no scientific theory
yet but the conjecture here and now is
of course that
happiness is about being thwarted in
your problem-solving
okay now continuing with the book at
this point
taking the step from heritable to
genetically determined
the explanationless psychological study
has transformed its correct
but uninteresting result into something
very exciting
for it has weighed in on a substantive
philosophical issue
optimism and a scientific issue about
how the brain gives rise to mental
states such as qualia
but it has done so without knowing
anything about them
but wait so the interpreters admittedly
we can't tell whether
any genes code for happiness or part of
it
but who cares how the genes cause the
effect whether by conferring good looks
or otherwise
the effect itself is real the effect is
real
but the experiment cannot detect how
much of it one can alter without genetic
engineering just by knowing how that is
because the way in which those genes
affect happiness may depend on knowledge
for instance a cultural change may
affect what people deem to be
good looks and that would then change
whether people tend to be made happier
by virtue of having particular genes
nothing in the study can detect whether
such a change is about to happen
similarly it cannot detect whether a
book will be written one day which will
persuade some portion
some proportion of the population that
all evils are due to lack of knowledge
and that knowledge is created by seeking
good explanations if some of those
people consequently
create more knowledge than they
otherwise would have and become happier
than they otherwise would have been
then part of the fifty percent of
happiness that was genetically
determined
in all previous studies will no longer
be so
pause there my reflection okay so
the explanationless study that might
suggest that for example
genes code for 50 of happiness
could be conferring that effect by
good looks but by those genes might
cause people to look a certain way
and so if those people are considered
good looking
because of the fact they've got these
particular genes then because they're
treated better in society because of the
fact that they're
better looking or considered to be
better looking
then this is the way in which the genes
affect the good looks
which then cause people to be happier
and so we skip the good looks bit and we
just go well the genes cause the
better happiness but as david says there
good looks is very much a cultural thing
and we know this you just look at
different cultures around the world and
what they consider
good looking we only have to go back to
the middle ages and of course
people who were very large and obese
were considered better looking
today people apparently who are far
more thin are considered better looking
so there is absolutely
a cultural component to what is
considered to be good looking
which by the way should give you pause
for a moment
when you consider that you're attracted
to someone or you have an attraction
towards someone
you might think that this is very much a
genetically determined thing
that you feel this way
and have absolutely no choice in the
matter
however if you have absolutely no choice
in the matter if it doesn't have
anything to do with
what you know about reality then this
would mean
that the genes that code for how
attractive you find someone
are predetermined but we know that the
genes between the middle ages and today
haven't changed that much in that way we
know for example that we can
take a person who is perhaps would have
otherwise been born into a culture
that considers people with extremely
long necks attractive
and raise them in a culture where length
of neck has absolutely nothing to do
with attractiveness whatsoever
and their mind about what they find
attractive
will have been changed not because the
genes have changed
but because their ideas about what is
attractive has changed
so it's very much to do with ideas and
not inborn ideas either i would argue
okay continuing with the book
david writes the interpreters of the
study may respond that it has proved
there can be no such book no such book
that can convince people that
all evils are due to a lack of knowledge
certainly none of them will write
such a book or arrive at such a thesis
and so the bad philosophy will have
caused bad science which will have
stifled the growth of knowledge
notice that this is a form of bad
science that may well have conformed to
all the best practices of the scientific
method
proper randomizing proper controls
proper statistical analysis
all the formal rules of how to keep from
fooling ourselves
may have been followed and yet no
progress could possibly be made because
it was not being sought
explanationless theories can do no more
than entrench
existing bad explanations it is no
accident
that in the imaginary study i have
described the outcome appeared to
support a pessimistic theory
a theory that predicts how happy people
will probably be
cannot possibly take into account the
effects of knowledge creation
so to whatever extent knowledge creation
is involved
the theory is prophecy and will
therefore be biased towards pessimism
behavioristic studies of human
psychology must by their nature
lead to dehumanizing theories of the
human condition
for refusing to theorize about the mind
as a causative agent
is the equivalent of regarding it as a
non-creative automaton
pause there my reflection now
i could go on for hours about this
particular thing it's such an important
point
the link that david makes here between
the mind
as a causative agent and also as being
creative
the link between cause between creating
something
and causing something to happen to
create new knowledge is to create
new possibilities in the world that were
not there before
that means once we've got these new
possibilities in the world because we've
created some new knowledge
so once we've got the knowledge of
nuclear fission for example
then we've got the possibility of
creating electricity
via nuclear fission reactors that
possibility did not exist before
we didn't have the choice about creating
electricity
via that mechanism so the creation
of knowledge has created new choices in
the world
it has caused new ways of producing
electricity in the world let's say
so again to create new knowledge is to
create new possibilities which means
new choices and acting on those newly
created choices means
causing events in the world that will
not otherwise have happened
without that knowledge creation and
this take on the nature of mind is so
far as i know
unique david's overarching theory of
knowledge really is
this this breathtaking world view
encompassing
how knowledge grows at the level of a
civilization
how it's growing here on earth right now
how it
does have and will continue to
increasingly have
cosmic significance and how how it will
cosmic significance and how it can be
invoked to explain
the nature of personhood which is what
we're going through here now
and how it is that we distinguish
persons from
other kinds of life in the universe
especially other animals
and to bring this full circle why
therefore persons
are themselves important in the cosmic
scheme of things
it's all about knowledge and the
mechanisms
by which knowledge is created and
when that knowledge is created how it
causes
the world to increase the number of
possibilities
open to people and so this is the sense
in which i would invoke
free will because free will is just
another synonym
for what's going on here the creation of
knowledge
which causes us to have more choices in
reality
and those choices in reality will only
be there once we've made the choice to
create the knowledge
and if we continue to create more
knowledge then we continue to have
more choices more possibilities and
we'll be more free
to do more different things if we don't
create knowledge then we have
fewer choices we have less freedom which
means we're also in more danger
so increased knowledge means solving
problems
and preparing for the unknown preparing
for
problems yet to be encountered the more
knowledge we have
the more wealth we've created and the
more we're able to
solve problems as yet unencountered
okay but back to the book the
behaviorist approach
is equally futile when applied to the
issue of whether an entity
has a mind i have already criticized it
in chapter seven in regard to the turing
test
the same holds in regard to the
controversy about animal minds
such as whether the hunting or farming
of animals should be legal which stems
from philosophical disputes about
whether animals experience qualia
analogous to those of humans when in
fear and
pain and if so which animals do now
science has little to say on this matter
at present because there is yet
no explanatory theory of qualia and
hence no way of detecting them
experimentally
but this does not stop governments from
trying to pass the political hot potato
to the supposedly objective jurisdiction
of experimental science
so for instance in 1997 the zoologists
patrick bateson and elizabeth bradshaw
were commissioned by the national trust
to determine whether stags suffer
when hunted they reported that they do
because the hunt is
grossly stressful exhausting and
agonizing however
that assumes that the measurable
quantities denoted there by the word
stress and agony
such as enzyme levels in the bloodstream
signify the presence of qualia of the
same
names which is precisely what the press
and public assumed the study was
supposed to discover
the following year the countryside
alliance commissioned a study of the
same issue
led by the veterinary physiologist roger
harris who concluded that the levels of
those quantities are similar to those
of a human who is not suffering but
enjoying a sport such as football
bateson responded accurately that
nothing in harris's report contradicted
his own
but that is because neither study
neither study had any bearing on the
issue in question
this form of explanation of science is
just bad philosophy disguised as science
its effect is to suppress the
philosophical debate about
how animals should be treated by
pretending that the issue has been
settled scientifically
in reality science has and will have no
access to the issue
until explanatory knowledge about qualia
has been discovered
pause there my reflection so i
rift on this particular passage
in my article titled humans and other
animals
and the ethics of eating meat and you
can find that on my
website just google my name brett hall
humans and other animals
and precisely on this point here about
how one can study
stags being hunted and find that certain
enzyme levels are raised in their
bloodstream
and this is supposed to be a an
indication that the fact of the fact
that they're suffering
while being hunted that they're afraid
and so the enzyme levels rise and so
these enzyme levels are
proof positive somehow that these stags
are suffering yeah so it's proof
positive supposedly
they they said that it was it was
the hunting is grossly stressful
exhausting and agonizing
why because the levels of this
particular enzyme were raised in their
bloodstream
but a another study
said that a human could have high levels
of
these enzymes in their bloodstream if
they were doing
a sport such as football and so
this is a problem isn't it on the one
hand we have
this exertion causing high levels of
this enzyme in the animal
and this exertion causing high levels of
this enzyme in a human being
but in the case of the human being
presumably they're enjoying
this activity how do we know the stag
isn't enjoying this activity well again
that begs the question
as to what it would mean for a stag to
enjoy something in the first place and
whether or not they have the capacity to
enjoy something in the first place
and this is something that i try to
explore uh in
my particular piece and in in in that in
that piece there i
uh i'll just read it's a very long piece
i'll just read a
a small part of it where i've written
consciousness is central to our concern
about the possibility
that other creatures experience pain let
us concede for the sake of argument that
what they do feel we might term
pain but this would be very much like if
we knew they were capable of
experiencing blue
knowing that another person is
tells us very little about the contents
of that experience
are they seeing the sky the blue mosque
in turkey
a policeman's shirt far more information
than
blue is perceived would be required to
give us an idea of what that experience
might be like we would need context
we would need an ex an entire
explanatory theory
about what that blue might be like and
it would take us into circles about
can they see shapes and do they
understand the relationship between
those things
and do they realize the sky isn't even a
physical thing unlike what the ancients
thought
they thought the blue sky was like blue
paint on glass
they thought it was a surface they
didn't know that what they saw
didn't actually exist and so it is with
pain really
even if we have an excellent cause and
effect explanation of the physiology of
how the stimulus we call pain is
transmitted to a brain
and what might cause it to arise and
what other stimuli like say hormones
being released into the bloodstream
absent further information we know very
little about how the pain might be
interpreted that is to say even if we
can describe the objective
physical goings-on in the nervous system
this tells us nothing about the
subjective experience of pain
for example the very same signals might
mean that a person is exercising
and enjoying pushing through the pain or
some such or perhaps a person is
partaking in jiu jitsu and the pain is a
necessary part of the learning
and so an objective good or perhaps the
person is suffering a heart attack
or perhaps a person simply doesn't even
understand what the sensation is
and so on and so forth okay so that's
end quote for my little blog post thing
but
if you're interested in more about this
um
this way of looking at the issue the
important issue of whether or not
animals suffer
and all the the very many related
um issues surrounding this is it ethical
to eat meat for example
should we be able to milk cows etc etc
etc some people have very strong
opinions on this now that's all very
well
but but to talk about the science of
this we have to be
very disciplined because there are no
scientific studies that show animals
experience
pain much less that they suffer all that
we have
are proxies and they might not even be
proxies for pain
saying that particular enzyme levels are
an indication of pain
is untrue or not possible to conclude
until such time as we have a scientific
theory
of what pain is and we probably won't
have that
until we have a scientific theory of
what consciousness is so i'm just going
to steal david's thunder a little bit
here
for what is to come what he's talking
about
now is the importance of indeed the
centrality of
to a large extent errors in the process
of science
being able to report on your errors your
uncertainties
the sources of error how to quantify
your uncertainties
and if you're not careful about this
you're going to end up
making false conclusions whole areas of
the physical sciences
in physical science courses at high
school university are devoted
to error analysis i'll put up on the
screen here
a section from a particular high school
syllabus about
error analysis you can see here it's
quite large
sources of error are a crucial part of
the methodology of any
scientific study and in physics we have
the special
capability of being able to quantify our
degree
of uncertainty to some extent now this
is not
uncertainty in sort of the
epistemological sense this is
uncertainty in the measurement sense
so when we've got a measuring device
that is able to measure to a certain
precision
or a particular technique that measures
to a certain precision
we report that we say that we could be
out by this much all that much
back to the book another way in which
explanationless science inhibits
progress is that it amplifies errors
let me give a rather whimsical example
suppose you have been commissioned to
measure the average number of people who
visit the city museum each day
it is a large building with many
entrances admission is free so visitors
are not normally counted
you engage some assistance they will not
need any special knowledge or competence
in fact
as will become clear the less competent
they are
the better your results are going to be
each morning your assistants take up
their stations at the doors
they mark a sheet of paper whenever
someone enters through their door
after the museum closes they count all
their marks and you add together all
their counts
you do this every day for a specified
period take the average
and that is the number you report to
your client however
in order to claim that your count equals
the number of visitors to the museum
you need some explanatory theories pause
there
just my comment this is popper's idea of
observation being theory laden you first
need a theory of what to observe
and how before you can start making
claims about
what those observations might tell you
about reality back to the book
for instance you are assuming that the
doors you are observing are precisely
the entrances to the museum
and that they lead only to the museum if
one of them leads to the cafeteria or to
the museum shop as well
you might be making a large error if
your client does not consider people who
go
only there to be visitors to the museum
there is also the issue of museum staff
do they count as visitors
and there are visitors who leave and
come back on the same day and so on
so you need quite a sophisticated
explanatory theory
of what the client means by visitors to
the museum
before you can devise a strategy for
counting them pause there
my reflection or commentary so already
we see
this quite profound yet simple point
that it's not a simple process
in science of going out there and
observing the world
this is why empiricism is wrong
observations do not come first cannot
possibly come first
you first need an idea about what to
observe and how
and sometimes even something as simple
as counting stuff
in this case counting visitors to a
museum is going to require an entire
structure of
theory in order to account for what
you're trying to figure out in the world
so the theory comes first and then the
observations
and then the decision between the
theories that you're trying to test with
those observations
okay back to the book suppose you count
the number of people coming out as well
if you have an explanatory theory saying
that the museum is always empty at night
and that no one enters or leaves other
than through the doors and that visitors
are never created destroyed split or
merge and so on then one possible use
for the outgoing count is to check the
in-going one
you would predict they should be the
same then if they are not the same
you will have an estimate of the
accuracy of your count
that is good science in fact reporting
your result without
also making an accuracy estimate makes
your report
strictly meaningless just my comment on
that
accuracy estimates are commonplace in
physics they are absolutely routine
not every other area of purported
science can make the claim that
physics does in being able to quantify
its uncertainty or doing as well with
uncertainties is what physics does
one area i know a little bit about is
astrophysics and
a huge deal is made about errors
and areas of uncertainty and what could
have gone wrong and there's always
hedges and caveats about
all the ways in which the observations
which purport to show something
could in fact be something else entirely
or not even
actually real one reason for this of
course is that the
amount of light we receive from distant
parts of the universe
is very very very low intensity in some
cases
and so we are observing things at the
very limit
of our the power of our instrumentation
but despite the
despite that we have extremely precise
instruments but with extremely precise
instruments
come quantifiable uncertainties you know
how good your instruments are and you
report that as
part of your experimental report as part
of your journal article
so that people reading it know that this
might not be a real effect
for various reasons you might report
things like the physical attributes of
the telescope
the resolution of the telescope and then
you might report things like
uh how bright the object was that you
supposedly observed
and then the reader can gauge whether or
not the
thing being observed the thing thought
to be observed might in fact be
noise in the background might not
actually be a real effect at all they
can judge that by having a look at the
sources of uncertainty the sources of
error that might be going on with that
report now
in psychology we might wonder is there
the same
level of detail and strict adherence to
to some extent strict adherence to the
methodology of science in this respect
of genuinely trying to report
all the things that might have gone
wrong all the areas of uncertainty all
the ways in which
the result the purported result could in
fact be a
huge error and not real at all okay so
skipping a little bit and going back to
the book
now suppose you are doing your study
using explanationless science instead
which really means science with unstated
uncriticized explanations
just as the copenhagen interpretation
really assumed
that there was only one unobserved
history connecting successive
observations
then you might analyze the result as
follows for each day subtract the count
of people entering from the count of
those leaving
if the difference is not zero and this
is the key step in the study
call that difference the spontaneous
human creation count if it is positive
or the spontaneous human destruction
count if it is negative
if it is exactly zero call it consistent
with conventional physics okay pause
there my reflection so this is great
so what david's driving home here is the
point that if you're not being careful
in your study about the sources of error
and therefore not being careful about
things like counting visitors to a
museum
and you're doing things like counting
the number of people going into the
museum and the known people going out
but you're making mistakes this is why
earlier on he said
the less reliable your assistance are
the less good they are at counting the
better for your study
because if they're really poor at
counting they might miss some people
coming in they might add some people
going out and therefore
people are apparently according to your
very careful scientific study are being
spontaneously generated and so you can
have a
paper written about this new kind of
physics and so this by the way is a
criticism of
explanationless science and of just
general bad science which is
explanationless science in large part
and we get this i don't want to say all
the time but more frequently than what
it should
happen and the softer the science
becomes the worse it can be
not unheard of in the hard sciences not
by a long shot
there are errors that are made in
physics there are errors made in
chemistry if
anyone is interested in a in a a one of
the most famous areas of is of course
the
cold fusion debacle you can go and look
that one up
i've mentioned in this series before so
errors can be made
and in the case of the cold fusion
debacle of course it was indeed the case
that the poor results were reported as
being
not consistent with conventional physics
so that's a rather boring thing when
you're conventional
when you're consistent with conventional
physics but if you're making errors then
you can make these grandiose claims that
something about your findings in fact
violate well-known laws of physics and
so we might wonder we can always bet on
these things by the way
whether or not the result of a
particular study which purports to
violate
some conventional law of physics is
itself true whether that's likely
a long-standing law of physics that so
far has no violations
has in fact been violated by the study
or
in fact the study is just making huge
errors
making some error somewhere or other and
so you always have that choice to make
now it can always be the case that that
conventional physics is being
violated in various ways that were wrong
about what we know
about the laws of physics in fact as
papillions we know that we're wrong
about the laws of physics because
well knowledge is infinitely improvable
and so whatever we know about the laws
of physics right now
will be riddled with misconceptions and
we will correct those misconceptions
we'll come to have a better deeper
understanding of the laws of physics so
we know
that the laws of physics as we
understand them now
is not the final word but this is not to
say
that that tomorrow when professor
so-and-so says that
the study that they've just recently
done has shown that the neutrinos are
traveling beyond the speed of light that
that therefore shows that the theory of
general relativity which
thus far has had no violation so far as
i know as the
thus far there's been no experiments to
show that
physics in any way is can inconsistent
with the theory of general relativity
but if some professor comes along
tomorrow and and and writes a paper
about how neutrinos are violating the
theory of general relativity by
traveling faster than the speed of light
then we've got a choice to make is it in
fact the case that this is an experiment
which
makes general relativity problematic or
is it the case that the professor and
their team have simply made an egregious
error
and in fact if you go back and look at
the history of that particular one which
happened at the large hadron collider
or involve the large hadron collider you
can find that in fact the
neutrinos never did travel faster than
the speed of light it was an error
and david's talked about that in the
beginning of infinity as well
okay back to the book the less competent
you're counting and tabulating
are the more often you will find those
inconsistencies with conventional
physics
next prove that non-zero results the
spontaneous creation or destruction of
human beings
are inconsistent with conventional
physics include this proof in your
report but also include a concession
that extraterrestrial visitors would
probably be able to harness physical
phenomena
of which we are unaware also the
teleportation to or from another
location would be mistaken for
destruction without trace
and creation out of thin air in your
experiment and that therefore this
cannot be ruled out as a possible cause
of the anomalies
of course they're my reflection now why
would you do this well of course of
course to get media attention because
you're
hungry for fame you want to be famous
scientists
are not immune to this far from it
far too often we see scientists who are
desperate for fame
and will say and do next to anything
to get in front of cameras now there are
kind of legitimate reasons why they want
some funding
and there are illegitimate reasons one
might say why they would do this
simply because they they crave prestige
or in
worse cases still authority they want to
be able to
have the ear of government by being a
famous scientist who has
discovered something remarkable in the
world and so they become many
celebrities and they earn money and so
on and so forth so
scientists are just human beings lots of
people have these foibles and these and
these flaws
but here's the way that a scientist
might go about doing that
by making mistakes and or or perhaps in
some cases
lazily making mistakes in which case
they're simply incompetent
or knowingly in which case they're
fraudulent making these errors
so that they can then claim meekly and
mildly that
perhaps it's the case that they've
discovered evidence for alien life but
they don't want to say
they don't want to quite say that okay
so just i'll just continue reading
when headlines appear of the form
teleportation possibly observed in city
museums say scientists and
scientists prove alien abduction is real
protest
mildly that you have claimed no such
thing that your results are not
conclusive
merely suggestive and that more studies
are needed to determine the mechanism
of this perplexing phenomenon you have
made no false claim
data can become inconsistent with
conventional physics by the mundane
means of containing errors
just as genes can cause unhappiness by
countless mundane means
such as affecting your appearance the
fact that your paper does not point this
out does not make it false
pause there my reflection okay there
there is a a wonderful technique for
detecting
extrasolar planets planets beyond our
solar system
and it is by using the technique
of finding solar systems beyond their
own where the alignment of the planet
just happens to be such that it passes
between
us and that other star and so if this is
the star then the planet can come in
front of the star
and that eclipses part of the light from
the star
and given the precision of our
instruments now given how good our
telescopes are and various other
techniques that we use for analyzing the
light that the telescopes gather
we can determine what the size of the
object is
that's going around that star we look at
what's called
dips in the light curve okay what's that
got to do with this
well recently over the last sort of um
over the last 10 years or so
i think the most famous example uh is
referred to as tabby's
star that's tabby t a double b why i
think
and now it's named after an astronomer
who
did this careful found this star where
the
dips in the light curve could not be
explained
by conventional astronomy
and it didn't seem as though what was
orbiting the star
apparently was a planet in the usual
sense or
it didn't seem to be a binary system and
every single reasonable explanation that
the astronomers could come up with
was ruled out by observations that were
made
now i'm certainly not implicating the
astronomer in question here in this
at all whatsoever but the media are
prone
to putting forth the notion things like
well could it be alien technology could
it be an alien civilization
that is causing these weird dips as soon
as someone
reputable makes that kind of claim and
they need not be a scientist
they they could just be a science
popularizer of some sort and saying well
we don't have any explanation
for what's going on and astronomy is
rife with these kind of things
where because we're looking at things we
don't always understand
some people are going to disingenuously
claim that
because we don't understand the
observation we've made that therefore
it's evidence of alien intelligence now
it could be but that's a general purpose
response to almost
any weird observation we can make of
deep space and so in the case of this
start was immediately
it was immediately latched onto as being
proof positive or near proof positive
that there was indeed an alien
civilization
that had that it created some huge
structure there is actually this
theoretical thing named after freeman
dyson i think freeman dyson came up
came up with it called the dyson sphere
and the dyson sphere
is theorized to be an alien structure
it would be an alien structure a
structure built by aliens of the far
distant future to capture all the light
that is being emitted by a star if you
wanted to really be efficient and not
lose any of the energy coming from a
star because you have super advanced
technology
and you want to capture lots of the
light coming from the star because
you're powering
some time travel device or whatever
which requires you to warp space and
time maybe you put
an entire sphere of material around the
star to capture all of that energy
now if you're only part way through
constructing such a dyson sphere maybe
what earthlings would see when they
point their telescopes towards your star
with the partially completed dyson
sphere
is something like the light curve of
tabby's star
okay yeah that's a really fun
interesting explanation and certainly
almost straight away
the people involved in the study became
quite famous at least in the science
community and
the science appreciation community i
suppose
so i don't know what the solution is to
that now or if indeed they have a
solution
but it can always be the case that it is
observational error and that doesn't
mean that the
astronomer themselves necessarily made a
mistake although that can certainly
happen
it can just be that the equipment has
malfunctioned in some way
which is what happened by the way with
the large hadron collider and the
neutrinos experiment
well effectively effectively it was a an
equipment malfunction the cables were
disconnected or something or other
okay let's go back to the book okay i'm
skipping a little bit and david's
talking about this study where people
are apparently disappearing or being
created spontaneously
and he writes you know if you're doing
the study or the person doing the study
for all you know they the people could
be disappearing in puffs of smoke
or in invisible spaceships that would be
consistent with your data
but your paper takes no position on that
it is entirely about the outcomes
of your observations so you would better
not name your research paper
errors made when counting people
incompetently aside from being a public
relations blunder
that title might even be considered
unscientific according to
explanationless science
for it would be taking a position on the
interpretation of the observed data
about which it provides no evidence in
my view
this is a scientific experiment in form
only
the substance of scientific theories is
explanation
and explanation of errors constitutes
most of the content of the design of any
non-trivial
scientific experiment pause there my
reflection and this is where we come
really to so much of what is done in
various areas of
psychology if you're only finding
correlations between
things as happens in much of academic
psychology
you're not explaining why one variable
is correlated with the other
you might be insinuating that one thing
causes the other and in certain areas of
psychology
let's say evolutionary psychology comes
to mind
the correlation is implied so strongly
that we just
that the practitioners seem to assume it
is a causation
that this population of people here has
this set of genes in common
and that same population of people with
that set of genes in common
tends to have this feature of their
personality
or mental life and so on also in common
and so it is a very small leap to say
that the genes are causing the behavior
in these people
that the genes are causing happiness the
genes are causing depression the genes
are causing this that or the other
there the genes are causing intelligence
the genes are causing a propensity for
mathematics or for music and so on and
so forth
that all of these mental features of a
person are somehow conferred on them
at least in part by the genes but
there's no explanation made
as to how the genes can actually cause
certain things now i think in some areas
of evolutionary psychology
people try to come up with explanations
but i don't think they're very good
explanations
i must concede it might be the case that
genes do indeed
cause let's say a propensity for
an interest in mathematics it's possible
but thus far the explanations that have
been
put forth in order to link some set of
genes
with tendency to be good in mathematics
are very weak indeed but so many people
simply
assume it's part of the social fabric
almost in the western world
that some people simply are born
good at mathematics and some people
simply are born bad at mathematics
repeat for music repeat for languages
repeat for
any other quality of the mind that you
like and so many people
have been taught to be genetic
determinists
that if someone at the age of
five doesn't show an interest in some
particular subject that they therefore
lack at the capacity to ever have an
ability in that subject
and that is simply false but but our
world view here
denies that possibility because of the
idea that we have
of the human mind as being this
universal
explainer and universal means that it
can actually do anything that anyone
else can do
there might be differences in speed and
you know how fast a person can think and
how much they can remember and that may
have a bearing of some sort
but it's hard to imagine that that would
explain everything
and that all of the people who are good
at mathematics in the world share these
same
share the same clock speed of their
brains or share the same ability to
remember
in fact that doesn't seem to be the case
but i'm traveling down an avenue that
is a dead end for the purpose of this
chapter so let me reverse and go back to
the book
and david writes speaking about the the
counting study the counting people at
the museum he writes
as the above example illustrates a
generic feature of experimentation is
that the bigger the errors you make
either in the numbers or in the naming
and interpretation of the measured
quantities
the more exciting your results are if
true
so without powerful techniques of error
detection and correction
which depend on explanatory theories
this gives rise to an instability
where false results drown out the true
in the hard sciences
which usually do good science false
results due to all sorts of errors are
nevertheless
common but they are corrected when their
explanations are criticized and tested
that cannot happen in explanationless
science
paul's my reflection obviously it can't
happen in explanation of science because
we don't have an explanation of the
meaning of the data
what what the what the theory is
explaining why
this set of data is linked to that set
of data
we don't have an explanation of all the
sources of
error that might be involved in
collecting the data and analyzing the
data
it's simply explanationless all we're
doing is collecting data
naively and in utter ignorance of the
mechanisms by which
that data might be an error okay back to
the book
consequently as soon as scientists allow
themselves to stop demanding good
explanations and consider only whether a
prediction is accurate or inaccurate
they are liable to make fools of
themselves this is the means by which a
succession of eminent physicists
over the decades have been fooled by
conjurers into believing that various
conjuring tricks
have been done by paranormal means bad
philosophy cannot easily be countered by
good philosophy
argument and explanation because it
holds itself immune
but it can be counted by progress people
want to understand the world no matter
how loudly they may deny that
and progress makes bad philosophy harder
to believe that is not a matter of
refutation by logic
or experience but of explanation
if mark were alive today i expect he
would have accepted the existence of
atoms once he saw them through a
microscope behaving according to atomic
theory
as a matter of logic it would still be
open to him to say i'm not seeing atoms
i'm only seeing a video monitor
and i'm only seeing that theory's
predictions about me not about atoms
come true
but the fact that that is a general
purpose bad explanation
would be borne in upon him it would also
be open to him to say very well adams do
exist but electrons do not
but he might well tire of that game if a
better one seems to be available
that is to say if rapid progress is made
and then you would soon realize that it
is not a game
bad philosophy is philosophy that denies
the possibility
desirability or existence of progress
and progress is the only effective way
of opposing bad philosophy
if progress cannot continue indefinitely
bad philosophy
will inevitably come again into the
ascendancy for
it will be true and that's the end of
the chapter
so just that last sentence there if
progress cannot continue indefinitely so
if there is some
actual cosmic limit on our ability to
make progress and and many people
who have not encountered the work of
david deutsch
in other words the vast majority of the
world so far unfortunately
many people do have this idea even
people who purport to call themselves
optimists by the way
but not in the deutsche sense not in
david deutsch's sense
some people who claim to be optimus
nonetheless think there must be an
actual limit on how much progress people
can make
on what we can actually achieve in this
universe
david deutsch's vision has is is the
counter to that
it says that the only limit is what the
laws of physics impose
everything else is just a matter of
creating the knowledge and creating the
knowledge and time of course
but this is not a logical proof
that there might not be a limit to
progress even though we
say according to our explanations that
there is no such limit
if there was a limit however then
this would mean that progress would end
if progress ends
then it must be the case therefore that
bad philosophy is actually true
why because bad philosophy is
that set of ideas which
says why progress cannot continue or
should not continue or will not continue
or in other words as david says right at
the very end of the chapter
it's philosophy that actively prevents
the growth of knowledge
so it's quite a scary thought really but
happily as optimists in the david
deutsch sense
we know we know
that progress will continue indefinitely
that
there is no such limit to producing more
and more knowledge
and in solving our problems the only
thing the only thing that is preventing
us making
ever faster progress is our choices
that's convenient that's precisely what
the next chapter is all about
so so i'll see you there in chapter 13.
choices as always thank you to everyone
who is supporting
topcast and my work here i have a
patreon account
in fact i think you can just type in top
cast
patreon into google and it should come
up there's either that or there's a
paypal link on my web page as well thank
you for all your support
see you next episode
[Music]
you